Employee benefits
The UK firms reliant on the gig economy
Some of the firms making use of weak employment laws, putting workers on ‘self-employment’ contracts and low pay with no holiday or sick pay
Deliveroo couriers protested against new contracts changing pay from hourly to ‘per delivery’. The company later said it would not force workers to change contracts. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo
Tuesday 6 September 2016 11.43 BST
Last modified on Tuesday 6 September 2016 12.11 BST
Share on Messenger
The Guardian’s investigation of working practices at Sports Direct has highlighted problems faced by workers in the gig economy . In this world of precarious employment, flexibility can go hand in hand with low pay, high pressure and a backdrop of uncertainty.
Trade unions have warned that an apparent boom in self-employment shows workers are increasingly forced to accept temporary work on low pay. Workers for Uber, the taxi-hailing app, and Deliveroo, which delivers food from restaurants, have protested recently over working conditions .
The gig economy is here to stay. So making it fairer must be a priority | Will Hutton
Read more
Jonathan Bartley, co-leader of the Green party, said on Tuesday: “This kind of brutal employment practice exposes the razor sharp edges of the so-called gig economy, and this decision has not come a moment too soon. It’s time for companies like Deliveroo and Uber to follow suit by ending their use of bogus self-employment contracts and guaranteeing staff decent pay, sick leave and job security.”
Here are other examples of companies that have faced criticism over employment terms or are involved in the gig economy:
Deliveroo
Riders for the meals courier went on strike after the company tried to replace their hourly rate with a payment per delivery. The riders said the change would leave them vulnerable to low pay during quiet periods. Deliveroo, which delivers for well-known restaurants such as Gourmet Burger Kitchen and Wagamama, said last month it would not force workers to accept new contracts .
Uber
Workers took the company, which enables people hail a taxi using their phone, to an employment tribunal in July . The drivers argue they are technically defined as employees and should receive benefits such as sick pay. One driver said he was placed under “tremendous pressure” to work long hours. The tribunal has not yet reported its decision. The company’s food delivery offshoot, UberEats, also hit the news recently when its operatives protested against what it claimed were cuts to pay rates.
Cycle couriers
Employees have also taken Excel, City Sprint, Addison Lee and eCourier to a tribunal arguing that the courier firms should treat them as employees and give them rights such as holiday pay and the national living wage.
Hermes
The delivery company pays drivers for using their own cars to deliver items ordered online for retailers. All its 10,500 workers are classed as self-employed . The arrangement, which is legal, means they are not entitled to the national living wage, pension contributions or holiday and sick pay.
Yodel
The company has 8,000 couriers on its books and operates a similar system to Hermes. Uber is reportedly considering entering the parcels and good delivery market. Amazon has started using freelance drivers to deliver goods but claimed they will earn between £13 and £15 an hour.

