Tax and spending
Philip Hammond to make autumn statement on 23 November
Hammond says he will use first budget statement as chancellor to support the country in preparation for Brexit
Britain’s new chancellor, Philip Hammond. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters
Thursday 8 September 2016 17.51 BST
Last modified on Friday 9 September 2016 07.39 BST
Share on Messenger
Philip Hammond will present his first budget statement as chancellor of the exchequer on 23 November, setting out how the government will use tax and spending plans to shore up the UK economy after the vote to leave the EU.
Appearing before a House of Lords committee , Hammond hinted that he would use the autumn statement to create headroom for the government to step in with support for the economy as households and businesses absorb the shock of the referendum result.
The statement will be accompanied by the latest forecasts for the economy and public finances from the independent fiscal watchdog, the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR). Economists expect the OBR’s outlook for growth to be significantly lower than at the time of the March budget given by Hammond’s predecessor, George Osborne.
— HM Treasury (@hmtreasury) September 8, 2016
The next #AutumnStatement will take place on 23 November 2016 https://t.co/YhBzWmjDNl pic.twitter.com/YvOuLyhFOW
Theresa May’s new government, hastily assembled after June’s Brexit vote, has already abandoned a plan to get the UK’s public finances back into surplus by the end of the decade. Hammond, who May appointed chancellor in place of Osborne, has previously said he might have to “reset” fiscal policy when he delivers the autumn statement. That was interpreted by some commentators as a hint that the government would tone down or abandon its commitment to spending cuts.
But the new chancellor also told the House of Lords economic affairs committee on Thursday that it was still important to cut the UK’s public debt. “I don’t think we should be cavalier about levels of debt,” he said.
He pointed to May’s statement that the government had not abandoned the intention to return the public finances to a surplus, merely the end of parliament deadline of 2019-20. The government currently runs a deficit on the public finances because it spends more than it takes in each year in tax and other income.
Hammond said he would not set out now what would be in the autumn statement, but he discussed the UK’s housing shortage in his appearance before the Lords, describing a “toxic mix” of increasing money supply and very constrained resources for building more houses. He reprised a theme of his predecessor by emphasising the need for the UK to urgently improve its weak productivity performance and talked about regional disparities in the economy.
Asked about the implications of leaving the EU for the UK’s large financial services sector, Hammond said it was in the EU’s interest for the UK to have free access to markets. It was in the interests of EU countries’ economies for London to remain the main European financial centre, he said.
As for whether he would respond to calls from Bank of England governor Mark Carney and other central bankers around the world for politicians to do more to shore up the economic recovery, Hammond said fiscal policy – tax and spending – could work alongside monetary policy, such as the setting of interest rate levels. He said the government would provide support to the economy as necessary during the Brexit negotiation process.
Asked what infrastructure projects the government could use as fiscal stimulus for the economy, Hammond said: “Any sensible chancellor would seek to do as much as possible through investment that will not only deliver short-term demand stimulus but will also address longer-term, structural problems in the economy.”
He said there was a role for “big, strategic projects”, but they were unlikely to act as a fiscal boost to the economy because of the long timelines involved. “Often it is modest, rapidly deliverable investments that can have the most immediate impact, particularly on the road network, but also in some places on the rail network,” he said.

